Revised considerations for 0-RTT (#59)
huitema/dnsoquic: draft-ietf-dprive-dnsoquic.md

QUIC transport {{!RFC9000}} and QUIC TLS {{!RFC9001}}. Clients SHOULD consider
potential privacy issues associated with session resume before deciding to use
this mechanism. These privacy issues are detailed in
{{privacy-issues-with-session-resume}} and {{privacy-issues-with-0-rtt-data}},
and the implementation considerations are discussed in
{{using-0-rtt-and-resumption}}.

The 0-RTT mechanism MUST NOT be used to send data that is

> not "replayable" transactions. For example, a client MAY transmit a Query as

Author: @saradickinson I would like your advice here. The DNS operations are defined in an IANA registry that we could quote -- https://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-parameters/dns-parameters.xhtml#dns-parameters-5. The registry currently defines the following:

OpCode | Name | Reference
-- | -- | --
0 | Query | [RFC1035]
1 | IQuery  (Inverse Query, OBSOLETE) | [RFC3425]
2 | Status | [RFC1035]
3 | Unassigned |  
4 | Notify | [RFC1996]
5 | Update | [RFC2136]
6 | DNS Stateful Operations (DSO) | [RFC8490]
7-15 | Unassigned |  

Of all of these, I see the benefit of allowing `Query` in 0-RTT, and the danger of allowing `Update` or `DSO`. I am not sure about `IQuery`, `Status` and `Notify`. Advice?

> not "replayable" transactions. For example, a client MAY transmit a Query as

Reviewer: Since `IQuery` is obsolete, I don't think there is any danger (generates a NotImp AFAIK). `Status` is similar and there was an effort 2 years ago to deprecate it but it failed because... well, DNSOP :-(  Servers respond with one of NotImp, Refused or give no response at all.
`Notify` is worth thinking about. Since it only effects secondaries and it can already be abused to trigger unnecessary SOA or XFR requests to a primary, most implementations already throttle the speed at which they will send those requests in response to one or more `Notify` messages. Some operators require `Notifies` to be TSIG signed before acting on the (which is also true of `Update`). TSIG does provide a defence against replay but note that RFC8945 recommends a default Fudge value (i.e. time offset for validation) of 300s.

> not "replayable" transactions. For example, a client MAY transmit a Query as

Author: So I think the text should say that only query with operation type "Query" should be considered in 0-RTT. Is there a case where some servers should *not* allow some specific queries, e.g., because they are some kind of "active" query that starts a script?

> not "replayable" transactions. For example, a client MAY transmit a Query as

Reviewer: This is what https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-dprive-early-data-00 proposed, but this was questioned in the following discussion that then petered out... (an IANA registry of allowed QTYPES was proposed). I notice that that doc was adopted by DPRIVE but then seemed to stall and has now expired.

> not "replayable" transactions. For example, a client MAY transmit a Query as

Author: I would rather not quote an expired draft. I also agree with Martin's general recommendation to use application level response codes rather than QUIC errors. Whenever we create a QUIC error, implementation have to end up mapping the QUIC error in some kind of transport semantic. How about giving servers the following choices:

1) Process the request, if the operation type is "QUERY" and the query can be processed without side effect,
2) Defer processing until the connection has been confirmed by the client (quote RFC 9001),
3) Reject the request and prepare a DNS REFUSED error.

If the WG finally produces a 0-RTT draft, it would update DoQ.

0-RTT, but MUST NOT transmit an Update. Servers that receive requests
for replayable transactions MUST NOT process them before the connection

> handshake is confirmed, as defined in section 4.1.2 of {{!RFC9001}}; 

Author: I was assuming that the notation {{!RFC9001}} automatically pulls RFC9001 in the authoritative section. I will verify that we do not have another reference expressed sooner as {{?RFC9001}}. We may want to consider changng that to {{QUIC-TLS}}, for better readability.

> handshake is confirmed, as defined in section 4.1.2 of {{!RFC9001}}; 

Author: I will try {{Section 4.1.2 of RFC9001}} tomorrow, but I am not sure that kramdown will like that.

> handshake is confirmed, as defined in section 4.1.2 of {{!RFC9001}}; 

Reviewer 2: Just don't forget to update kramdown.  It's a relatively recent addition to the tool.

See https://github.com/martinthomson/i-d-template/blob/main/doc/SETUP.md#update

> handshake is confirmed, as defined in section 4.1.2 of {{!RFC9001}}; 

Author: Let's hold on the "{{Section" updates for a subsequent PR.

> handshake is confirmed, as defined in section 4.1.2 of {{!RFC9001}}; 

Author: Deferred editing with issue #64

servers MAY close connections in which replayable transactions are

> attempted with the error code DOQ_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Author: Yes, makes sense. There are three plausible behavior, in order of desirability:

* Queue the request, and only process it after the connection is confirmed
* Reject the request, with an error of type "TOO_EARLY" (TBD). probably with RESET_STREAM, because the client has already sent the whole stream and set the FIN bit.
* Close the connection with either "PROTOCOL_ERROR" or "TOO_EARLY".

This is DoQ specific, so it make sense to process that at the DoQ layer, rather than DNS. But Sara may have another opinion.

> attempted with the error code DOQ_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Author: On the other hand, I like to put the onus on the client on this. If we keep the text saying "clients must not [do bad stuff]", then doing such stuff is a protocol error, and servers MAY just close the connection and yell. If on the contrary we say that servers should queue the offending request until the session is confirmed, then that means that the clients may just as well push these requests in 0-RTT.

So the question is, do we see a compelling advantage for clients pushing the request in 0-RTT, versus waiting for connection complete and pushing them? Yes, the requests will be ready immediately after the server receives the "client finished" signal, by opposition to "after the first 1-RTT packet from the client is received". Those two events are likely happening at the same time. Is that worth the extra complexity?

> attempted with the error code DOQ_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Reviewer 2: It's a shared risk.  In HTTP, we have some expectations about what is safe that are generic (GET is good) and some that are specific to the request (some POST requests are perfectly OK, but not all of them).  Sometimes the client will know that it is safe, sometimes they will think it is safe and learn that it is not.  This latter one is the key risk: if the server knows that a query is unsafe (because of how it manages the cache for that particular entry, or other reasons), then it needs to be able to reject things, likely on a per-query basis.

For DNS, I think that enqueuing queries is probably unwise in most cases.  A TOO_EARLY or similar response at some layer is probably fine, though I would tend toward using DNS-layer signaling.  That is for the same reason we use HTTP status codes in RFC 8470: it makes the information available to the DNS client proper, not just the adapter that is enabling DoQ, which might only be an intermediary.

> attempted with the error code DOQ_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Reviewer: If this were to be failed at the DNS layer, then the server would have to send REFUSED and we would need to define a transport specific EDE code to signal TOO_EARLY and then require all implementation of DoQ to implement EDE, which does feel odd to me. 
I think this question should go to the list for discussion because it is a functional change to the spec.

> attempted with the error code DOQ_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Author: The server can send a refuse response for any query, not just those defined in 0-RTT. This does not require definition of a QUIC-level error. I think reusing the REFUSED error is simpler than adding a transport-level mechanism.

> attempted with the error code DOQ_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think that REFUSED + EDE(TOO_EARLY) sounds like a good plan.  I agree that list discussion is appropriate.

depending on the level of available resources. Timeouts may be longer during
periods of low activity and shorter during periods of high activity.

### Using 0-RTT and resumption

Using 0-RTT for DNS over QUIC has many compelling advantages. Clients
can reestablish connections and send queries without incurring a connection
delay. Clients and server can thus negotiate low values of the connection
timers, without incurring latency penalties for new queries, reducing

> the number of simultaneous connections that servers need to manage. On

Author: Yes, the benefit is server side.

> the number of simultaneous connections that servers need to manage. On

Author: New text attempts to present that clearly as a benefit to the server.

the other hand, session resumption and 0-RTT data transmission create
privacy risks detailed in detailed in
{{privacy-issues-with-session-resume}} and {{privacy-issues-with-0-rtt-data}}.
The following implementation recommendations are meant to reduce the privacy
risks while enjoying the performance benefits of 0-RTT data, with the
restriction specified in {{connection-resume-and-0-rtt}}.

Clients SHOULD use resumption tickets only once, to reduce risks of tracking by third parties.
Privacy conscious clients SHOULD NOT use session resumption if their IP address
or location has changed, to reduce risk of tracking by the servers.

Clients may receive address validation tokens from the server using the

> NEW TOKEN mechanism; see section 8 of {{!RFC9000}}. The associated tracking

Author: Let defer this for a separate pass on marking "section" references.

risks are mentioned in {{privacy-issues-with-new-tokens}}. Privacy conscious
clients SHOULD only use the NEW TOKEN mechanism when they are also using session
resumption, thus avoiding additional tracking risks.

Servers SHOULD implement the anti-replay mechanisms specified in section 8 of
{{?RFC8446}}. Servers that can enforce single use of resumption tickets for 0-RTT
per section 8.1 of {{?RFC8446}} SHOULD do so, as this is consistent with the above
recommendation that clients use resumption tickets only once. All servers MUST use
the Freshness Checks defined in section 8.2 of {{?RFC8446}} to assess the delay between
creation of the Client Hello at the client and the arrival at the server, 
and disable 0-RTT if that delay is larger than a threshold of at most 30 seconds.

Servers SHOULD issue session resumption tickets as soon as possible after the handshake

> is confirmed, to maximize chances that the client can use resumption and 0-RTT if a

Author: That was a suggestion from Robert Evans. I can't put words in his mouth, but I think he was trying to navigate two concerns:

1) Use 0-RTT as much as possible, in order to minimize delays and also server load
2) Do not renew tickets if the connection does not fully complete.

I agree that the second concerned is already addressed by TLS and QUIC. The tickets are carried in 1-RTT data packets, and those can only be received by the client if the connection completes. An attacker replaying 0-RTT data without access to the connection's secrets will not be able to receive a new ticket. And yes, the asap requirement is probably a property of the TLS/QUIC stack, not something that the DoQ implementer can affect much.

understands the associated risks. In our case, allowing 0-RTT data
provides significant performance gains, and we are concerned that a
recommendation to not use it would simply be ignored. Instead, we provide
a set of practical recommendations in {{connection-resume-and-0-rtt}}
and {{using-0-rtt-and-resumption}}.

The prevention on allowing replayable transactions in 0-RTT data
expressed in {{connection-resume-and-0-rtt}} blocks the most obvious
risks of replay attacks, as it only allows for transactions that will
not change the long term state of the server. 

Attacks trying to assess the state of the cache are more powerful if
the attacker can choose the time at which the 0-RTT data will be replayed.
We believe that the freshness tests recommended in {{connection-resume-and-0-rtt}}
significantly reduce the time range in which 0-RTT data can be
replayed, and thus significantly reduce the potential of such
attacks. The maximum delay parameter stated in {{connection-resume-and-0-rtt}}
is 30 seconds. We believe this is consistent with commonly used values
of the cached records TTL, and thus sufficiently small to impede

> most replay attacks.

Reviewer 2: Now we get to some rationale for the 30s value.  If the goal is to ensure that the replay window is shorter than the minimum cache retention time, that sounds reasonable.  In that case, please express the requirement in those terms, rather than pick a value seemingly at random.

That is, I think that you are trying to say:

> When deciding whether to accept 0-RTT, servers need to allow for some variation in the calculated ticket age; see {{Section 8.3 of RFC8446}}. This allows for both variation in network round trip time plus drift in the clocks of client and server relative to each other.  In a caching resolver, the length of the window over which 0-RTT is accepted SHOULD be less than the minimum time that a record will be cached.  (Then you need to reference the text on the attack, which needs to be elsewhere, I think.)

All that said, I'm not sure that this helps much.  The goal seems to be to stop an attacker from using replays of the same query to observe timing and then infer the precise time that the record was evicted, and from that tell which record was being queried.  However, that's something that is possible no matter how wide the window is.  The tolerance only narrows the time over which replays might be allowed.  (FWIW, NSS uses a node-specific bloom filter for anti-replay, which means that you would have to hit different nodes for each replay, but that also means that you are likely hitting a different cache.)

The only advice that really helps here is to reduce the tolerance as much as you can.  Which is advice that TLS already provides.

> ## Privacy Issues With Session Resume

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Privacy Issues With Session Resumption
```

The QUIC session resume mechanism reduces the cost of re-establishing sessions
and enables 0-RTT data. There is a linkability issue associated with session
resume, if the same resume token is used several times. Attackers on path
between client and server could observe repeated usage of the token and
use that to track the client over time or over multiple locations. 

The session resume mechanism allows servers to correlate the resumed sessions
with the initial sessions, and thus to track the client. This creates a virtual
long duration session. The series of queries in that session can be used by the
server to identify the client. Servers can most probably do that already if
the client address remains constant, but session resume tickets also enable
tracking after changes of the client's address.

The recommendations in {{connection-resume-and-0-rtt}} are designed to

> mitigate these risks. Using session resume tickets only once mitigates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mitigate these risks. Using session tickets only once mitigates
```

the risk of tracking by third parties. Refusing to resume session if addresses
change mitigates the risk of tracking by the server.

## Privacy Issues With New Tokens

> QUIC specifies address validation mechanisms in section 8 of {{!RFC9000}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
QUIC specifies address validation mechanisms in {{Section 8 of RFC9000}}.
```

Author: Let's defer the "section" reference updates.

Author: Deferred with issue #64

> The NEW TOKEN mechanism allow QUIC servers to provide clients with
> address validation tokens, and avoid an extra RTT when address
> validation is required. The tokens are tied to an IP address. QUIC

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use of an address validation token allows QUIC servers to avoid an extra RTT
for new connections. Address validation tokens are typically tied to an IP address. QUIC
```

clients normally only use these tokens when setting a new connection
from a previously used address. However, due to the prevalence of NAT,
clients are not always aware that they are using a new address. There

> is a linkability risk if clients mistakenly use a NEW TOKEN after

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is a linkability risk if clients mistakenly use address validation tokens after
```
